# 20_Credit_Risk_Classification_Project

## Overview of the Analysis

### Analysis Purpose & Dataset Intro
The primary purpose for this project was to create a machine learning model that is able to predict the creditworthiness of potential borrowers by training the model using historical lending information. More specifically, the goal was to train a machine learning model using a sample/fictitious dataset of historical lending information from a peer-to-peer lending services company (which included elements such as loan size, interest rate, debt-to-income ratio, total debt...etc.) to predict whether a loan was healthy (`0`) or high-risk (`1`). Since the historical data provided the outcome/loan status, I could split the dataset in order to train and test the  machine learning model.

The dataset was heavily skewed towards health loans, with **75,036** loans identified as healthy and only **2,500 loans** identified as high-risk, which likely mirrors ratios similary found to actual lending services companies.

### Stages of machine learning model development and analysis
As mentioned earlier, I first split my dataset into input data (X) and output/value to predict (y) and split the entire dataset into a training and testing dataset. Once split, I created my Logistic Regression model and fit the model (trained the model) using the training subset of data (X_train/y_train). Once the model was fit, I could generate predictions (predicted y/outcome values) using my test subset of data (X_test). Finally, in order to review the accuracy of my model, I generated a confusion matrix (displaying True Positives, True Negatives, False Positives and False Negatives), and a classfication report that provided precision and recall information for each output (0/1) and overall model accuracy. 

### Model algorithm 
For this project, I used a Logistic Regression algorithim, which is a classification algorithm that provies the probabilty of a data point being in a category (`1`) or not(`0`) utilizing a sigmoid fuction. Since the goal was to determine creditworthiness (liklihood of a healthy loan vs high-risk loan), using a classification algorithim such as the logistic regression model makes sense. 

## Results: Logistic Regression Machine Learning Model: 

* Overall Accuracy of model: 99% accuracy on test subset of data
* Precision for identiifying healthy loans (`0`): Classification report rounded to 100%. However, because there were some False Negatives seen in the confusion matrix (Predicting the loan to be healthy/ `0` when it was actually high-risk/ `1`),it is more accurate to state that the precision was greater than 99.5%. 
* Recall for healthy loans: 99% (102 False Positives (predicted `1` when it actual was `0`). 
* Precision for high-risk loans: lower than healthy loan precision at 85%
* Recall for high-risk loans: also lower than healthy loan recall at 91%
* NOTE: Precision and recall being better/higher for healthy loans makes sense since there are significantly more healthy loans in the dataset. 
    
## Summary

As can be seen in the results from the test subset of data, the model created was very accurate overall, predicting both healthy and high-risk loans incredibly well. And while the model preformed better for healthy loans, both outcome precision and recall percentages are considered very strong. 

For lending services company, it is likely the most important to avoid approving loans that are high-risk. In other words, the company would want a model that is able to minimize the number of loans that they predict to be healthy, but are actually high-risk (false negaitve). 

The fact that this model actually has stronger recall relative to precision for high-risk loans means that it is slightly better at avoiding false negatives compared to false positives, which is more beneficial to the company avoiding high-risk borrowers. It would mean that they may decline to approve borrowers that would have had healthy loans, but I believe this is better than approving more loans and having more loans that end up being at risk of deafulting. 

Further, the ability for this model to correctly identify high risk loans 91% of the time (recall), is a very strong model. I would likely recommend this model to the lending services company as it is likely that this model is able to predict loan status outcomes as a more accurate rate than the current model they a using since the data includes loans that they approved and were later designated high-risk of defaulting. If the company had reservations about the potential consequences of the relatively small rate of error, they could run a pilot period using this model along with their current model to see if one has less loans at risk for defaulting in a given time period before fully implementing the model. 

## Data Reference
Data for this dataset was generated by edX Boot Camps LLC, and is intended for educational purposes only.

## Code Source

Additional resources referenced and utilzied for my project code are listed below: 

- Scikit Learn Documentation </br>
https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/classes.html#module-sklearn.metrics
